ABC. Testing, testing, one, two, three, one, two,
three. This is Thursday, May 25th, or 6th.
Haskell, I think it's the 23rd, isn't it? I don't
know. Yeah, it's the 23rd. Anyway, we're in
Austin, and I have the pleasure and honor of
interviewing Hector Gutierrez. Hector, to
introduce yourself to this tape and anyone who
might... read the typed version, describe your
biography before you came to A&M. Family, where,
when, where'd you go to high school and all that? I
grew up in a family of five children. I was the
oldest child. Considered my family working
class, middle class family. Went to high school at
Martin High School, which is the only high school
in Laredo, until my senior year, which is when we
built our second high school. That high school was
named J.W. Nixon. after the superintendent of
schools and we were the first graduating class of
Nixon. How many in your class? We had about 600
people in my class. I was elected student body
president my senior year and I was also head of the
ROTC and had the privilege of of receiving the
valedictory honors at the end of my senior year.
What did your family do for income? My father was a
car salesman. My mother was a GS-6 at the Air Force
Base, so they were both working parents. I might
say that my grandfather Teodosio was one of the
leaders of, I guess, in the business movement in
Laredo that involved, what I would say,
Hispanics. Even Laredo, which is 95% Hispanic,
didn't have really any leaders that the community
saw as business leaders, and Teodosio was in that
category. When he died, he was probably, I'd say,
in the top 10 of wealth in Laredo. So my father grew
up in a very wealthy family. The house where they
lived is a historic home. It's a mansion. His
sister still lives in that house. And so my father
came from a lot of wealth, but my grandfather died
very young. And as a result of that early death at
age 49, My father and his brothers weren't able to
manage the money. They had cotton gins. They had a
lot of the land where Tony Sanchez has discovered
his oil and gas was my grandfather's land, but they
sold the mineral rights. When did your family get
to the Laredo area? My grandfather came to Texas
from Guerrero, which is where Lake Falcon is. He
crossed border when he was seven years old with the
current mayor's, mayor of Austin's father, Gus
Garcia. Gus Garcia's dad and my grandfather
crossed at the same time and Zapata and that was
when he was six and he died when he was 49. So it was,
you know, the early 1900s,
late 1800s. Okay. Why did you go to A&M?
I always wanted to be an Aggie. Well,
first of all, I felt always that I was going to serve
my country somehow, that I was going to have to go
into the military somehow. Excuse me one second.
I'm getting up paid. Why you attended A&M? Where
did you hear about it, and what had you heard about
it? Well, I, this is a very, I remember going to a
family's home, and on their mantle were pictures
of these two young men in uniform, and I asked, it
was my younger brother's godparents, and it was
Gus and Lua Fernandez. And one of the pictures on
the mantle was Raul Fernandez, and it was when he
was at A&M. And I always asked, why is he in uniform?
And these godparents of my younger brother would
tell me about A&M. And this handsome, sharp young
man and his brother, I don't know whether his
brother was in an army uniform or whether he was an
Aggie as well, but that influenced me. And I
figured, you know, there were other families that
I knew had children that had gone to A&M. And I
figured if I went into the military, I wanted to be
an officer. And I, of course, I was an ROTC in high
school. These were, you know, the late 60s, and,
you know, we had the Cuban Missile Crisis, we had
the Cold War, we had, you know, the aftermath of the
Korean War, and we had Vietnam. I felt if I was going
to serve my country, I wanted to be an officer and go
to a school that afforded me the opportunity to...
But no older brother or first cousin? Nobody. In
fact, all of my family, all my cousins, all my
brothers and sisters are all Longhorns. I'm the
only Aggie in the family. All right. Now, among
your siblings, you're which one? I'm the oldest.
You're the oldest. So, all right. So, you're, are
you the first in your family tree to go to college?
Yes. Mom and dad didn't? My mother and father did
not. Now, my brother had, I mean, my father had two
brothers that went to Wharton. So, so that, that
tells you a little bit about the family he came from
and... Did you understand growing up that you were
going to go to college? Definitely. How can they do
that? I knew it would be hard because I knew that I
would have to probably work to get myself through
college. I worked summers at Sears during high
school, but my father, on his selling car
salaries,
put me through college. I didn't have to work
through college. When did you first visit A&M and
what was your impression of it? The first time I
visited A&M was the day I was dropped off. Oh,
really? And had my trunk in Did A&M do anything to
recruit you? No. You applied. I applied and I think
another influencer for me was that a lot of my
friends that were going to college and, you know, I
was pretty studious but I was also active in
extracurricular activities. A lot of the kids
that were going to college from Nixon, that first
graduating class, happened to be going to A&M, and
so we all went to A&M together. And when we started
applying, we applied together, and we compared
letters of acceptance with each other. And I
believe you said before we turned the machine on of
your high school record, summarize that. I think
in my high school class, I was very active always
politically with student council and was either
in junior high I was president of student council
and senior high school I was president of student
council. I was also head of the ROTC. I don't know
whether I stated it while I was on record or not, but
the valedictorian was... Did you get a little
scholarship as a... I got, I think, about a $1,000
scholarship, which was a lot back then. Oh, yeah.
And I was also the most popular boy. So I wasn't
totally a nerd by being valedictorian. I was most
popular as well. Right. So when you went up to A&M to
enroll in the fall of 1968. No, the fall of 65. It was
the first year that the Corps was non-compulsory.
How did you get there? When you went up there, who
took you? I went with a friend of mine. My parents
didn't take me up there. I went with a friend who had
a car. And what did you take in that, what stuff? You
know, the main thing I took, I took a couple of, I
remember I took some books, I took obviously
casual clothes, my mother's cookies, some, I
remember I put a lot of salsa, cans of salsa in my
footlocker. But I got there not knowing what
outfit I was going to be in. what dorm I was going to
be in. And the first night, there were five Aggies
that arrived. And five of us went up in the car, and
how we got that stuff in the car, I don't know. But we
were all afraid to spend the night in our own room,
so we decided that we'd go stay with an individual
by the name of Doug Kennedy, who happened to be in
the jock dorm, and those dorms were
air-conditioned. Ours were not. So five young
men... stayed in the same room on two beds, one on
the floor, two of us on each of the single beds, you
know. Was this in Henderson Hall? Yes, it was
Henderson Hall. All right. Exactly. Then you go
back. How were you received? Well, Haskell, I'll
tell a funny story that I got to my outfit. I was in
Squadron 9, and there was an individual by the name
of Chapeau was his last name. He was a senior. He was
our commander, and I never thought I'd forget his
first name, but at this moment, I'm having trouble
recollecting his first name, but he was from San
Francisco, and he was taking aerospace
engineering, and He introduced himself to me. He
was in his senior boots and I was carrying a
footlocker and he asked me if I knew how to whip out.
And I looked at him and I said, of course I do. He
said, well, do it. and i was with a bunch of friends
and he was with a bunch of seniors and i said not here
i
obviously did not know what whipping out was and it
had a different connotation with me than it had
with him but i of course everybody started
laughing and I'm sort of embarrassed telling that
story, but that was my first introduction. He
asked me if I knew how to whip out, and I said, of
course, but not in the hallway and not in the
presence of other people. Did he give you any kind
of lecture or anything? He showed me how to whip
out. Oh, okay. He said, let me show you how to whip
out, and at that point, I started backing away
and... He put out his hand, and he stated his name,
and he told me where he was from, and he said, my name
is Chapo, I'm from San Francisco, and I'm taking
aerospace engineering, and your name is
Gutierrez, and you're from Laredo, and you're
taking mathematics. And he said, that's whipping
out. And so... Do you have any idea how you got
assigned to the unit you got assigned? No idea. I
knew I was going to be in an Air Force unit and at that
time there were no, you couldn't lobby to be in
certain units like you do now. In fact, it was all
random. You didn't know how you were picked or how
you were selected to go into certain units. All
right, describe then you and your new roommate
moving into your quarters. My first roommate was
Michael Yodite, who was J-O-D-E-I-T, Michael,
and he was from Houston, Texas, and he was sort of,
you know, about a foot and a half taller than I was.
He had probably never met a Hispanic in his life,
and we were rooming together, and we became the
best of friends, and... How quickly? Very
quickly, but at the end of my, at the end of his first
semester, he ended up going to room with another
person, then I had a second roommate whose name was
Frank Davis. He was also from, from the Houston
area. Describe what y'all had in that room that
fall. Describe the furnishings. The main thing we
had was two desks, two beds, a bunk bed. Who slept up
and who down? I slept up and he slept down. Why? He
slept because he was so tall he was afraid his feet
would hang out too. I told him, I said, Michael,
your feet will hang out on the first bunk too, but he
was so tall that he thought that that it'd be better
for the short guy to be on top, and it was more
hassle. Did you have any radio typewriter or
anything like that? I had a radio. I wasn't able to
have a record player, and it was a turntable record
player, until my sophomore year. Very Spartan. We
had a sink in our room and, you know, learned how to
put together uniform and learn how to shine shoes
pretty quickly. Who gave you any, you and your
buddies who were fish, who gave y'all the training
about Aggie traditions and how to do and not to do
things in the dorm? The main training came from,
quite frankly, the sophomores. We didn't, I mean,
prior to my going to A&M, I had no mentor prior to my
going to A&M that told me what it was like or that
even gave me a clue of what it was like. When I was in
high school, I concentrated on high school. I was
totally consuming, and I didn't have any idea of
what A&M looked like. where
the dorms were, the kind of training we would have,
how ROTC at Texas A&M would greatly differ from
that which we got, you know, as a course study in a
high school. So it was a world unknown to me. I did
not realize how competitive everything would be.
Even though we were a freshman class, within the
class there was competition. Competition, in my
opinion, to be the best drilled, to be the best
educated freshman. Did your outfit have a
nickname? Hellcat 9. Hellcat 9. And did a motto or
anything like that? I don't recall a motto, but we
were known, you know, Hellcat 9 was known as, you
know, a bunch of hell raisers. And it was also the
outfit in the Air Force that was known for hazing
more than any other Air Force outfit. How soon did
you get hazed? You had to sign hazing however you
want to. I define hazing as, in the very loose sense
of the word, hazing to me was having to do push-ups,
having to do sit-ups, having to do chores for the
upperclassmen like shine their shoes. And that
began, all that began when? The very first hour
that I was there. it kept me in shape. I'd never been
in better shape in all my life. Hazing to me was
running. It wasn't, it wasn't defined in my mind at
that point as acts of demoralizing a human being or
demonizing a person. I never got hit by a board, but
I never, I never was hit by a board. I did a lot of
pushups, I did a lot of sit-ups, and I did a lot of
running for the mistakes that I made. Were there
cush questions in the chow hall? Yes. Do you
remember any of, do you have any favorite cush
questions? know, ask, there are certain things in
my life that I remember vividly, but the Cush
questions were, I mean, obviously, you know,
they'd ask us campusology, and we had, you know, we
had,
we had to answer questions correctly, and... All
right, let me share it with you, my favorite one
that I've learned, and you can use this perhaps in
some of your service activities at that big dome
building. How many stars are there in the Texas
flag? No, there's two. There's one on each side.
And if they say two, you say, no, there's one. It
goes through both ways. You can't win. That's
right. That's right. In other words, the
upperclassmen would get the kush no matter what.
That's right. In the dining hall lingo, what were
some of your favorite food nicknames? Well, to me,
it was the bull neck was meat, and of course
spuds were the potatoes, and buckshot were peas.
You know, the cow was milk, and I don't remember
what water was. Was tea horse?
Because wasn't it, it was some animal, wasn't it?
Tea was, I don't know whether tea was horse or not,
but I know that... What was ice cream? I don't know
that one.
And all desserts were cush? All desserts were
cush. There was no... Bread was deal? Deal.
Let's see. Mustard was baby? Mustard was baby. And
I won't repeat what mayonnaise was. Yeah, yeah,
yeah. The... How soon was it before the
upperclassmen whipped you fish into training,
where you fell in, you marched, you did this, that,
and the other? The first week. I mean, they, you
know, I didn't know anything. Well, I knew a lot
about marching because I was in ROTC, and I was head
of the ROTC, and so I was pretty good at marching.
But I tell you Haskell, I didn't want to show that
off because you didn't want to stand out too much
too quickly, okay? And so I learned to march with
everybody else. I didn't want to display the fact
that I was a Nazi. And in your era, Did the fall
semester begin in late September? It began in
mid-September. Mid-September. Mid-September.
And we went after Christmas to finish the
semester. That is correct. That is correct. Were
Saturday classes still being held? Yes. Okay. I
didn't have too many Saturday, but we did have
Saturday classes. And your major was math? My
major is mathematics. Describe enrolling that
first semester. Did you stand in line over at...
Stood in a long line. It took about I would say, no
exaggeration, two hours to get my classes. I mean,
just, it was, the procedures to get a course of
study were very, in my opinion, it was almost like
harassment. It wasn't very organized. I had to go
to too many different places to get a class
schedule. You would have thought it would have all
been done in a central location, but I had to go to
several different places to enroll. All right,
describe going to class as a beginning freshman.
Going to class as a beginning freshman was a
terrifying experience because on the way to that
class, you would meet you'd have to pass
upperclassmen, or you would see upperclassmen
that you knew, and you would have to call them by
name. And so you were always on, you know, pins and
needles. You always scouted at least a block ahead
to take the path of least, least resistance,
obviously, to get to the course on time, but to
avoid where people were because then you'd have to
say hello to those upperclassmen. And you were
living in which dorm area? I was living in the core
area in dorm six my first year, and then in dorm four
my second year, and then I went to core staff my last
two years, dorm two. That first semester, did you
have any courses that ended up being important to
you later? Describe those and why. The first, the
most important one that I took that first year was I
was in the honors program and I took a course on
great books and the great books of the world and it
was in that course that I met a lot of my current
friends, people like Wayne Prescott and Kent
Caperton, Mark Caperton, excuse me, Mark
Caperton, Kent's brother. They were in that
class, and it was the one class where I met a lot of
the leadership of the civilian student body, and
that course shaped a lot of my thinking for how I was
going to act in later years at A&M. I didn't realize
it at the time, but those people that were in that
class as freshmen, for some reason, I guess people
in the honors program tend to be leaders. They were
the leaders on the civilian side of... Was the
instructor in that honors course important? His
name was Dr. Abbott, and I'll never forget. John
Paul Abbott. Make believe I didn't know him.
Describe him. He was a,
to me, if I were going to draw a professor, you know,
close my eyes and draw a professor, I would draw him
like Dr. Abbott. He was, you know, he had glasses
and he had beautiful white hair. When he spoke to
you, his glasses would go down on his nose and he'd
peer and look at you over those glasses. He was a
very kind and gentle man, yet very uh i mean in his
disposition but extremely demanding and what he
expected you to produce as far as analysis of the
books i remember studying job with him the book of
job was one of the books we studied and the way the
way he taught that book was completely different
than anything I'd ever learned in a Catholic
church. And so he was, he made a great, great
impression. That was Dr. Skravanek. was another
one because I decided to minor in Russian in
college because I already knew Spanish and I
wanted to learn another language and this was
again during the Cold War and I thought why not
know, why not get to know the language of the enemy
and so I decided to learn Russian and I was very good
at Russian. I had a straight, I had a 4.0 grade point
in Russian. I never made anything less than an A and
I If I'd taken like six more hours, I think I would
have had a double major. I would have had a major in
Russian as well. What about your first math
courses since that was your major? First math
courses were, you know, advanced algebra and
calculus.
I took a lot of math courses, and I did very great in
math until I got to the theory. I was better in the
application portions and the formula portions of
math than I was in the proving theorems and getting
into the deep analysis of differential
equations, you know. What were your personal
guidelines about going to class, behavior,
study, and all that? My freshman and sophomore
year was to maximize my grades, to get the best
grades I possibly could. Did you go every day to
class? I never missed a class that I can... Where
did you sit? I always sat in the back of the room on
the right-hand side. Why? so I could observe what
was going on in front of me and know what, to this
day, when I go into a hearing, I sit in the very back
of the room so I can observe everything that's
going on, who's there, who's paying attention,
who's not paying attention, and also be close to
the exit. Did you ever go to sleep in class? I can't,
never, never that I can recall. I was tired, I'm
sure, but I can't ever recall falling asleep in
class. And you and your buddies, what were your
study routines? My study routines were in between
classes, Haskell, I would go to library, and I had
a, you know, I'd go to the stacks and hide, so nobody
would see me, and I'd avoid upperclassmen, and so I
would find a quiet place in the library to study.
Where was your special place? I used to go to, like,
the fourth floor, fourth, fourth stacks, where I,
you know, close to a window, you know, so I could
look out, and, but, but very few people went up
there, I mean, but. And nobody was bothered in the
library, were they? Nobody bothered me in the
library. Where were the other interference-free
areas? The only other interference-free area
that I found was in the men's restroom where there
were lots of stalls and you could shut the stall and
study in there and nobody would would bother you
and so I I'd find a restroom and I'd sit there
sometimes for 30 minutes reading a book or sounds
crazy but I knew that with that door shut nobody
nobody would bother me it was quiet now in the MSC
y'all weren't hazed though were you we weren't
hazing the MSC but there was there was there was too
much activity and too much distraction I'd also go
to the At night, I used to go to the Bermuda Inn and
get a cup of coffee and sometimes spend an hour
there. How would you get over there? I'm now
advancing to the end of my sophomore year. Junior
year, I got a car and I would drive there. But your
freshman year, you didn't have wheels? No. Let's
see. In your freshman year, where did you and your
buddies play, relax? The main place that we would
relax would be at the MSC. That pretty much was, or
we'd relax by going running anywhere but the
quadrangle area. So we'd go run. On the campus
though? On the campus and other parts of the
campus. You know where that golf course was? The
golf course was there. What did you wear when you
ran? Shorts? Shorts, yes.
We always, our outfit had certain color shorts and
we'd wear those shorts and wear that and a t-shirt
and we'd take off the t-shirt if it was too warm. In
your freshman year or so, was there anybody to whom
you turned for academic advice?
Not in my outfit, there was not. No, but I mean any
teacher, advisor, assistant dean? No. How soon
was it before you got involved in some pranks, some
good bull, some Immediately. I mean, you know, as a
class we were always trying to harass the
upperclassmen. Give some examples of fish
pranks. One of the fish pranks that, one example
would be is that those of us that had a car, and I
didn't have one my freshman year as mentioned
earlier, but we'd go out into the country and we'd
find chickens. or we'd find a rooster and we would
know when an upperclassman was going home to spend
time with his family on a weekend or go see his
girlfriend so we'd find a way to get that chicken or
that rooster into that individual's closet and
we'd lock that chicken or that rooster in the
closet and after three days it was not a pretty
sight. Uniform-wise or otherwise. Or if anybody
had the unfortunate... I remember one time I ran
over an armadillo and we put that armadillo in a
paper sack. We brought him back and we found the
softest pillow we could in an upperclassman's
room. And put that armadillo to bed. In the pillow?
In the bed, covered up on the pillow. And...
Normally, what was the response of the person who
had the prank played on them? What did they do?
Well, they obviously would try to find who the...
you know, who the instigator was, and it was always
me, sir, or I did it, sir. Even though you may not
have done it, it may have been your freshman
buddies down the hall or upstairs, but we were, you
know, all one, and we were always guilty. What was
then the punishment? then the most horrible
punishment was having to go to the
community showers in our rain gear and which was
heavy heavy rubber and in our heavy boots and
having to do push-ups and sit-ups until you could
hardly stand it and while while there was steam you
know coming from the showers they put the showers
on hot and and so the combination of steam